name: borges-on-writing
layout: post
title: Borges on Writing
time: 2009-08-30 22:50:00 +03:00
tags: [literature]

<blockquote>[...] when I began writing, I thought that everything should be defined by the writer. For example, to say "the moon" was strictly forbidden; that one had to find an adjective, an epithet for the moon. (Of course, I'm simplifying things. I know it because many times I have written <span style="font-style:italic;">la luna</span>, but this is a kind of symbol of what I was doing.) Well, I thought everything had to be defined and that no common turns of phrase should be used. I would never have said, So-and-so came in and sat down, because that was far too simple and far too easy. I thought I had to find out some fancy way of saying it. Now I find out that those things are generally annoyances to the reader. But I think the whole root of the matter lies in the fact that when a writer is young he feels somewhat that what he is going to say is rather silly or obvious or commonplace, and then he tries to hide it under baroque ornament, under words taken from the seventeenth-century writers; or, if not, and he sets out to be modern, then he does the contrary: he's inventing words all the time, or alluding to airplanes, railway trains, or the telegraph and telephone because he's doing his best to be modern.<br /></blockquote><br />Jorge Luis Borges, The Paris Review. Issue 40, 1967.<br />Taken from "The Paris Review Interviews, vol. I".<br /><br />I can identify with this feeling. I believe it is similar when one is a novice in programming, in photography or any other creative stuff. I remember when I first built my website, or coded my first few homeworks. There was always some flashy things, clever tricks (or so I thought) here and there. I wanted to surprise the "other" somehow, and it really didn't matter to me how that would be. It's the same in <a href="http://blog.tayfunsen.com/search/label/foto%C4%9Fraf">photography</a>, I know it because I think I'm still living my novice period there.<br /><br />Here's to simplicity and quality!
